Documentation (#16)
Simai00/jmp: docs/backend.md

# Code Overview
## Directory Structure
* [`src/`](../api/src) Source directory. Not public
    * [`JMP/`](../api/src/JMP) Application directory
        * [`Controllers/`](../api/src/JMP/Controllers) Controllers to handle requests and build the responses
        * [`Middleware/`](../api/src/JMP/Middleware) Custom [Middlewares](https://www.slimframework.com/docs/v3/concepts/middleware.html)
        * [``Models/``](../api/src/JMP/Models) Raw data objects with the functionality to convert to an array
        * [``Services/``](../api/src/JMP/Services) Business logic and database communication
        * [``Utils/``](../api/src/JMP/Utils) Useful classes

## Slim specific classes
* Private
    * [``dependencies.php``](../api/src/dependencies.php) Initialize services, controllers, middlewares and add them to the slim container
    * [``settings.php``](../api/src/settings.php) Slim settings and required settings for the dependencies
    * [``routes.php``](../api/src/routes.php) Register routes with their middlewares here
* Public
    * [``index.php``](../api/public/index.php) Application entry point

## Authentication

### Usage

> We use [JWT](https://jwt.io/) for authentication. The token must be submitted in the Authorization header using the Bearer schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use [JWT](https://jwt.io/) for authentication. The token must be submitted in the authorization header using the bearer schema.
```

### Registration
Only administrators can register new users. To register a new user, the [register route](api-v1.md) has to be called.

## Validation
Every user input has to be validated before it is processed.

All validations are stored in [validation.php](../api/src/validation.php) and use the [RespectValidation](https://github.com/Respect/Validation) validation engine. The stored validations have to be submitted to the [validation middleware](https://github.com/DavidePastore/Slim-Validation) of the corresponding route in [routes.php](../api/src/routes.php).

**Example:**
```php
->add(new Validation($container['validation']['getUser']))
```
See more at [Routes](#route).

### Translations

> In case the automatic generated error messages doesn't fit your requirements or hold sensible data like a password, you can add translations as described in [Translate errors](https://github.com/DavidePastore/Slim-Validation#translate-errors).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case the automatic generated error messages don't fit your requirements or hold sensible data like a password, you can add translations as described in [Translate errors](https://github.com/DavidePastore/Slim-Validation#translate-errors).
```

**Improvements:**
If you recognize code, which doesn't comply with these rules, just correct them. 

## Optional
In this application we use the [`Optional`](../api/src/JMP/Utils/Optional.php) very often.

In php it's possible to let a method return `mixed` types (e.g. `User|bool`) or null able objects, but we decided to not use these possibilities.

When a method doesn't get the expected value, in other words, the execution fails, then we return an `Optional` instead of a `null` or `false` value.

### Examples
**On success:**
```php
return Optional::success('the data to return, could be of any type');
```
**On failure:**
```php
return Optional::failure();
```

**Handle the returned Optional:**
```php
$optional = methodWhichMayFail();
if ($optional->isSuccess()) {
    // success
    $data = $optional->getData();
} else {
//failure
}
```
**Vic versa:**
```php
$optional = methodWhichMayFail();
if ($optional->isFailure()) {
    // failure
} else {
    // success
    $data = $optional->getData();
}
```

## Array Conversion
The response object of the slim framework offers a method called `withJson`. This method converts an assoc array to JSON.

> Because the php cast functionality doesn't comply our requirements to cast model objects to associative arrays, we use the following util and interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the php cast functionality doesn't comply with our requirements to cast model objects to associative arrays, we use the following util and interface:
```

**[ArrayConvertable](../api/src/JMP/Models/ArrayConvertable.php):**
Every model has to implement this class, so that it can be properly converted to an associative array.
For example implementations see the existing models: [Models](../api/src/JMP/Models).
```php
public function toArray(): array
{
    return array_filter((array)$this, function ($value) {
        return $value !== null;
    });
}
```
The implementation has to **remove all null variables**.

**[Converter](../api/src/JMP/Utils/Converter.php):**
This util is used to convert a model object or  a list of model objects properly to an associative array.
Use it in the controller as shown in this examples:
```php
return $response->withJson(Converter::convert($modelObject));
```
or
```php
return $response->withJson(Converter::convertArray($list));
```

## Type declarations & phpdoc

> Everywhere it is possible we use object oriented php. So every method signature have to use the [php type declarations](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/functions.arguments.php#functions.arguments.type-declaration). If you try to call a method and pass arguments of another type as declared, then php will throw an [TypeError](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/class.typeerror.php).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everywhere it is possible we use object oriented php. So every method signature has to use the [php type declarations](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/functions.arguments.php#functions.arguments.type-declaration). If you try to call a method and pass arguments of another type as declared, then php will throw a [TypeError](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/class.typeerror.php).
```

Also, every method has to be documented with phpdoc. A short summary or description of the method and a documented signature is sufficient.

**Example (from [UserService.php](../api/src/JMP/Services/UserService.php)):**
```php
/**
 * Select a user by its id
 * @param int $userId
 * @return Optional containing a User on succeed
 */
public function getUserByUserId(int $userId): Optional
```

## SQL
The services handle the business logic as well as the whole database communication. At the moment there isn't a separated Persistence Layer with e.g. Data Access Objects (DAOs).

> That the services doesn't become a mess, all SQL have to be coded with the following rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That the services don't become a mess, all SQL statements have to be coded with the following rules:
```

* Use the heredoc syntax:
```php
$sql = <<<SQL
# SQL
SQL;
```
* Write every sql keyword upper-case
* Use the **`AS`** keyword to change column names from the sql underscore style to the camel case style. E.g. `SELECT user_id as userId ...`
* Use the following for optional parameters: `WHERE (:optionalId IS NULL OR id = :optionalId)`. Examples in [EventService.php](../api/src/JMP/Services/EventService.php)
* A specific service don't query tables to which the service doesn't belong unless it's a join

# Developing a new route
This guide will take you through the most important steps to develop a new route.
Make sure you've read [Code Style](#code-style) before reading the following guide.

## Api specification
First of all the new route has to be documented in the [api-specification](api-v1.md).

## Service & Model
Routes return JSON mostly containing one or a list of model objects. So you have to [create a new model](#create-a-new-model) if the required doesn't exist yet. The model is just a raw data object with the functionality to convert properly to an array.

Then you need a service to communicate with the database and to handle the business logic.

> [Create a new service class](#create-a-new-service-class) if no appropriate exists, otherwise add the required method/s to the existing service class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Create a new service class](#create-a-new-service-class) if no appropriate exists yet, otherwise add the required method/s to the existing service class.
```

### Create a new service class
If no useful service class already exists, you have to create a new one.

The service must
* have a `ContainerInterface` constructor parameter
* hold all dependencies as private attributes
* have all dependencies set inside the constructor
* be added to the slim container inside [dependencies.php](../api/src/dependencies.php)

Check out already existing services as examples. [Services](../api/src/JMP/Services) 

### Create a new model

> If the required model not already exists, you have to create a new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the required model doesn't already exist, you have to create a new one.
```

  * [Type declarations & phpdoc](#type-declarations--phpdoc)
  * [SQL](#sql)
- [Developing a new route](#developing-a-new-route)
  * [Api specification](#api-specification)
  * [Service & Model](#service--model)
    + [Create a new service class](#create-a-new-service-class)
    + [Create a new model](#create-a-new-model)
  * [Controller](#controller)
    + [Create a new controller class](#create-a-new-controller-class)
  * [Route](#route)

<small><i><a href='http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc/'>Table of contents generated with markdown-toc</a></i></small>

# Code Overview
## Directory Structure
* [`src/`](../api/src) Source directory. Not public
    * [`JMP/`](../api/src/JMP) Application directory
        * [`Controllers/`](../api/src/JMP/Controllers) Controllers to handle requests and build the responses
        * [`Middleware/`](../api/src/JMP/Middleware) Custom [Middlewares](https://www.slimframework.com/docs/v3/concepts/middleware.html)
        * [``Models/``](../api/src/JMP/Models) Raw data objects with the functionality to convert to an array
        * [``Services/``](../api/src/JMP/Services) Business logic and database communication

>         * [``Utils/``](../api/src/JMP/Utils) Useful classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        * [``Utils/``](../api/src/JMP/Utils) Utility classes
```

## Slim specific classes
* Private
    * [``dependencies.php``](../api/src/dependencies.php) Initialize services, controllers, middlewares and add them to the slim container
    * [``settings.php``](../api/src/settings.php) Slim settings and required settings for the dependencies
    * [``routes.php``](../api/src/routes.php) Register routes with their middlewares here
* Public
    * [``index.php``](../api/public/index.php) Application entry point

## Authentication

### Usage

> We use [JWT](https://jwt.io/) for authentication. The token must be submitted in the Authorization header using the Bearer schema.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use [JWT](https://jwt.io/) for authentication. The token must be submitted in the authorization header using the bearer schema.  
```

The submitted token is decoded by the [jwt-middleware](https://github.com/tuupola/slim-jwt-auth).  
The custom [authentication middleware](../api/src/JMP/Middleware/AuthenticationMiddleware.php) checks the permissions of the enquirer using the `sub` entry of the decoded token.
If the enquirer has got the right permissions for the route, he can pass.
If no token is supplied or if the supplied token is invalid, a 401 is returned.
In case the enquirer just hasn't got the required permissions, a 403 is returned.
### Login
To receive a new token, the user have to call the [login route](api-v1.md#login).  
If the username and the password are valid, a new token is generated with the following service class [Auth.php](../api/src/JMP/Services/Auth.php).
The password is hashed using [`password_hash`](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/function.password-hash.php) with the `PASSWORD_DEFAULT` option before it is stored in the database.
To verify a password at a login, [`password_verify`](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/function.password-verify.php) is used.
### Registration
Only administrators can register new users. To register a new user, the [register route](api-v1.md) has to be called.

> 

Reviewer: Which route is meant? The create user route?

I'd remove the registration section as the documentation of endpoints should not be in this file.

Author: It's also part of the authentication and a requirement of the project. So I think it's not wrong to link the registration of the api specification here.

It's the create user route, so I will update the link.

Add the translations to [validation.php](../api/src/validation.php) and to the middleware as second parameter.
**Example:**
```php
->add(new Validation(
    $this->getContainer()['validation']['login'],
    $this->getContainer()['validation']['loginTranslation']
))
```
# Code Style

It's important, that everyone complies with the following rules.

**Improvements:**
If you recognize code, which doesn't comply with these rules, just correct them. 

## Optional
In this application we use the [`Optional`](../api/src/JMP/Utils/Optional.php) very often.

In php it's possible to let a method return `mixed` types (e.g. `User|bool`) or null able objects, but we decided to not use these possibilities.

When a method doesn't get the expected value, in other words, the execution fails, then we return an `Optional` instead of a `null` or `false` value.

### Examples
**On success:**
```php
return Optional::success('the data to return, could be of any type');
```
**On failure:**
```php
return Optional::failure();
```

**Handle the returned Optional:**
```php
$optional = methodWhichMayFail();
if ($optional->isSuccess()) {
    // success
    $data = $optional->getData();
} else {
//failure
}
```

> **Vic versa:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Vice versa:**
```

```php
$optional = methodWhichMayFail();
if ($optional->isFailure()) {
    // failure
} else {
    // success
    $data = $optional->getData();
}
```

## Array Conversion

> The response object of the slim framework offers a method called `withJson`. This method converts an assoc array to JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response object of the slim framework offers a method called `withJson`. This method converts an associative array to JSON.
```

Because the php cast functionality doesn't comply our requirements to cast model objects to associative arrays, we use the following util and interface:

**[ArrayConvertable](../api/src/JMP/Models/ArrayConvertable.php):**
Every model has to implement this class, so that it can be properly converted to an associative array.
For example implementations see the existing models: [Models](../api/src/JMP/Models).
```php
public function toArray(): array
{
    return array_filter((array)$this, function ($value) {
        return $value !== null;
    });
}
```
The implementation has to **remove all null variables**.

**[Converter](../api/src/JMP/Utils/Converter.php):**
This util is used to convert a model object or  a list of model objects properly to an associative array.
Use it in the controller as shown in this examples:
```php
return $response->withJson(Converter::convert($modelObject));
```
or
```php
return $response->withJson(Converter::convertArray($list));
```

## Type declarations & phpdoc

> Everywhere it is possible we use object oriented php. So every method signature have to use the [php type declarations](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/functions.arguments.php#functions.arguments.type-declaration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everywhere it is possible we use object oriented php. So every method signature has to use the [php type declarations](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/functions.arguments.php#functions.arguments.type-declaration).
```

> If you try to call a method and pass arguments of another type as declared, then php will throw an [TypeError](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/class.typeerror.php).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you try to call a method and pass arguments of another type as declared, then php will throw a [TypeError](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/class.typeerror.php).
```

Also, every method has to be documented with phpdoc. A short summary or description of the method and a documented signature is sufficient.

**Example (from [UserService.php](../api/src/JMP/Services/UserService.php)):**
```php
/**
 * Select a user by its id
 * @param int $userId

>  * @return Optional containing a User on succeed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * @return Optional containing a User if successfull
```

 */
public function getUserByUserId(int $userId): Optional
```

## SQL
The services handle the business logic as well as the whole database communication. At the moment there isn't a separated Persistence Layer with e.g. Data Access Objects (DAOs).

That the services doesn't become a mess, all SQL have to be coded with the following rules:
* Use the heredoc syntax:
```php
$sql = <<<SQL
# SQL
SQL;
```
* Write every sql keyword upper-case
* Use the **`AS`** keyword to change column names from the sql underscore style to the camel case style. E.g. `SELECT user_id as userId ...`
* Use the following for optional parameters: `WHERE (:optionalId IS NULL OR id = :optionalId)`. Examples in [EventService.php](../api/src/JMP/Services/EventService.php)

> * A specific service don't query tables to which the service doesn't belong unless it's a join

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A specific service doesn't query tables to which the service doesn't belong unless it's a join
```
